So good morning everyone. Let's
start.
First of all, actually have you
had the chance to see this movie?
Memento by Christopher Nolan.
Trust me, I mean, if I
have one movie I'm going to
suggest to a friend of mine or
from Christopher
Nolan. Trust me. Watch this
movie. I mean it's worth it to
watch this movie two or three
times. So although it's an old
movie, I know, but,
It's one of the best movies and
actually it's a symbol of, I
mean postmodernism
in cinema actually, which
is started by
Tarantino in Pulp Fiction,
and Christopher Nolan because of
the form and playing
with the time. So it's one of
the archetype in this
genre so, before we start
today's lecture first of all.
So we are going to continue our
lecture on sequential logic.
And we said that sequential
logic is a digital unit or
a logic circuit that has
feedback from the output to
the input. So we're kind of
really using what we've.
Um.
What we output in the previous
step or previous time interval
to reuse it for another, I mean
input to this system.
Uh, I'm going to continue, but
before that, I just wanted to
Mention about SET. I mean, the
student evaluations of teaching.
We already perform an informal
survey, but this is the formal
survey from the school. It
starts this Thursday up until
two weeks until December 9th. So
if you have any questions, you
can go to this link about this.
Please, I mean, I'm going to
remind you about this
this Wednesday too.
And also next week so
please go through this.
Uh, you on UWinsite Student
and then evaluate
this course, my teaching
slides, whatever. Actually all
the parts of this course, the
assignments and etc.
So this is one note. Another
note is about
The problem or an issue that
raised by one of the students
and I'm happy that these students
actually found this, and this is
the issue. So basically, uh,
according to the
school's policy.
Oh yes, according to the
school's policy, as I said here,
within the last week of the
classes and also after that,
during the exam period, no
assignments can be due, so we
cannot ask the students to do
some assignments within the last
week and also the after the
exam week. This is one
thing, so
because of the two weeks
extension to the assignments,
the lab for this week and also the
lecture assignment this
week and next week has a deadline that is
is gonna I mean conflict with this
policy. Another thing is that, uh, we
cannot remove these lecture
assignments and the lab
assignments for this week and
next week because it changes the
marking scheme in the course
outline. And there is another
policy for this school that you
cannot change the course outline
after the first 2 weeks of
classes, so we cannot change
that too. So the only solution
actually is this.
I will put the official
deadline or due date up until
before the last week, meaning
that the December 2 next week.
One week before the last week.
And then, uh, we offer an
extension. Uh, as I as you see
here, we offered the extension for
this week's assignment, one week
extension for all the
students. So basically the
official deadline is gonna be
December 2nd, but we accept a
one week extension for
this week and also for the next
week. We accept two week
extensions. So by the
extension with me, we mean
that we accept all the late
submissions for these two
assignments. For this week's
assignments and next week's
assignments. So I will explain
this clearly I mean in the
first part of this week's
lab, and also I will explain
it in the lecture assignment
documents. So any
questions in this regard?
So. Since there's no
question, so let's.
Continue.
...
OK.
Um.
So. We tried to create some
feedback by the simplest logic
circuits using a single
AND and a single OR and we said that
they have some problems in order
to memorize just one bit. Then
we use two NOR gate with cross
feedbacks and by analyzing this
unit, we figured out that this
unit is able to
Store zero and one whenever we
changed the X&Y, the two inputs of
that. And this logic circuit had
two inputs and two outputs F1 and F2.
We said that the F1 is going to
be the main output and we like
this circuit because F2
in most cases is the complement
of F1. So we start with
considering the current state of
the logic circuit at time T, and
we wanted to predict or see
what's going to be the output
for F1 and F2 at time T + 1.
So whenever X&Y are both 0, so
the NOR gate depends on the other
input, so F1 at next time is gonna
be F2 at current time,
Followed by the not. F2 is
is gonna be F1 followed by
the not at current time.
If X is 1 and Y is 0, because
in the NOR gate, if one input is
1, so we don't have to look
for the other
input, it becomes one followed
by the not zero. So if X is one,
F1 is gonna be always 0.
As you can see here, X is one, F1 is
going to be 0. However, Y
because it's zero, it depends on
the current state of F1 followed
by the not
for the F2. And also for when
a Y is 1 and X is 0. So
again this time F1, because Y
is 1, comes here, so F1 followed by
the not is 0, so F2 is gonna be 0
and X waits for the F2 followed
by the not.
And if both are one, we
don't have to look at the
current state of the logic
circuit and both are is gonna be 0
for the next time interval,
because this one is
is gonna be one, this is going to
be one followed by not, 00.
And we said that if we wait for
another time interval. T + 2,
so basically if we
assume that the T + 2 is gonna be
the next time interval, the
previous time interval is gonna be
T + 1. So basically it is
exactly the same as this truth
table T, T + 1. This one T +
2 is on the previous step T + 1.
So again, the same. F1 at T + 2
is gonna be F2 followed by the not
and T + 1 when X is zero and Y
is zero.
F2 at T + 2 is gonna be F1 at T +
1. Followed by the not.
And all the same for the other
rows. So this is exactly as the
way that T become T + 1
and T + 1 becomes 2 + 2.
So if you put all these two
together and wait for two time
intervals, so if the current time
is T, we wanted to see what's
the output of F1 and F2 at time
T + 2. And we see that
F1 at time T + 2 based on the
previous truth table is F2 at
time T + 1 followed by the not.
So what's the value of F2 at time
T + 1? F2 at time T + 1
is F1 at time T, followed by
the not. So if you replace it
here, it becomes F2 followed by
two nots, so it becomes F1, not
not. So it becomes F1. So you see
that if we wait for two time
interval, if X is zero and Y is
zero, F1 is gonna be F1 at two
previous time intervals.
F1 at T + 2. The same is with
F2. F2 at time T + 2 is F1
at time T + 1 followed by the
not, and if you look at the F1
at time T + 1, F1 at time T
+ 1 is F2 at time T
followed by the not. So if we
replaced it here, it becomes F2 at
time T followed by two nots.
So it becomes F2.
You see that if X is zero and Y
is 0. After two time
intervals, the logic circuit
is gonna come back to the
current state. F1 is gonna be F1
at time T. F2 is going to be F2 at time T.
If you check with other rows, if
X is 1 and Y is zero, F1 is gonna
be 0 and this is because X is 1
At the NOR gate.
However, F2 is F1 followed by
the not for the previous time
interval T + 1 and the F1 at T + 1
is zero, followed by the
not, becomes one. And this was
because we said that if X is 1 and Y
is 0, there it is a reset action
which makes the logic circuit
goes to the main output zero and
the complement of that one. So
this is the reset state.
The 2nd row is when X is zero
and Y is 1. The set action and as
you can see here, for after two
time interval, it becomes 10
which is this set state, meaning
that we set the logic circuit.
The only case when we do not
like that is when the X is 1 and
Y is 1, which goes to zero and
stays there. As long as the X is
1, and Y is 1, both of F1 and
F2 are is gonna be zero. They are not
complemented each other and we
said that we assume that this is
a forbidden state and don't
care. So we try not to put 1
in X and 1 in Y.
And then, uh, in order to
summarize this, so based on the wait for two
time intervals, 00 is the store, so the
action in the store. What we
have already in the logic
circuit, F1 is going to be F1 at
time T. F2 is gonna be F2 at time T.
10 meaning that the reset action
goes to the reset state, the
main state of the largest
circuit is gonna be reset or zero. The set
action, 10, so the main output
is gonna be 1, the compliment
going to be 0 so we set them. We
make it 1 and this is the
Forbidden State. So we said that
whenever the X&Y is one, you
just go to the don't care condition.
Because when X is 1 and Y is
zero, we do the reset action and
make the logic circuit go to
the reset state. We call X = R.
And whenever Y is 1 and X is
0, we go to the set state.
We've renamed the Y to S, set,
so then we said that this is the
RS logic circuit. Whenever R is 1 and
S is 0, reset, or when R is 0 and S is 1,
set. Both are zero, meaning that
we do not want to do reset or
set, meaning we store.
We keep the status of the logic
circuit, whatever it is.
And if both are one, we just
simply say that this is
the don't care condition
and we don't like that.
And in order to show it as a
block diagram, you usually show
the RS logic circuit like this. R S
as two inputs. Main output Q,
which shows the current state
of the logic circuit, and the
second output is gonna be the
complement of the Q, Q prime.
And as you can see here there
is an inversion bubble here.
This is the block diagram for
the RS sequential logic, and we
said that we can see what's
happening
inside the logic circuit within
the time, based on different
value of RS. So when they RS are
both one, it is forbidden.
We have don't care condition. We don't
have to look at the main output
Q because both are zero and
we don't like that.
And then when the R and S
changes as you can see, the
R changes here. It goes to
zero and S is 1. So this is the
set action. So it brings the
status of the logic circuit to
one. As long as the R is zero,
and S is 1, it keeps one.
And suddenly, if R is still
zero, and S becomes 0, so 00 is
the store. Whatever you already
have, just keep it.
And at this time, you see that
R becomes one very shortly.
R becomes one here. And S
remains zero. This is the reset
action. So we reset the internal
state of the logic. If it was
one, it becomes 0.
And then suddenly, S becomes
one. R is 1, so as long as
both are one, the whole state
is going to be don't care condition
or invalid condition.
And suddenly R drops to 0, S is
still one. So this is the set
action, so it recovers to the
set state. It remains at the set
state because both R and S are
00. It is in the store action.
And R becomes one, S becomes
zero. This is the reset
action, so it drops the
states to zero and etc.
So we already I mean, uh,
considered this
To just see what's the behavior
of this sequential logic based
on different value of RS.
In this diagram, one problem or
issue is that
Whenever the R and S,
the input of the sequential
logic changes, the value
inside the sequential
logic changes too.
OK. So as you can see here.
Whenever the RS changes,
the status changes.
So.
In the next slide,
we want to just
See that is it possible
To have a control on when the
changes happen? The RS
controls how the change inside
the sequential logic is gonna
happen. So whenever we store,
RS are both are zero, so we
store. If R becomes 0 and S
becomes zero, it means that you
want to do the reset. If S is 1
R is zero, we wanna do the set,
meaning that we want to memorize
one. And we never put the RS
both as one because it
goes to
the don't care condition.
So this is the way we control
how the state changes, but
Is it possible to control when
the changes happen?
So we want to build a sequential
logic with the latch, so latch
as you know is a lock. So we
want to kind of create a
lock on the sequential logic,
in order to accept the change
whenever we unlock the
sequential logic. So it's kind
of a door with a lock, so
whenever we open the door of the
sequential logic, we accept the
change. We look at the
S and R in front of the door.
However, as long as the door is
closed or the latch is locked,
we don't look at the R and S.
Whatever the value behind the
door is, the door is closed as
we don't accept the change from
the R and S. This sequential
logic is called RS or SR latch,
meaning that we have a latch in
the sequential logic.
So by the latch, we are going to
control when the changes
actually applies to the
sequential logic. So basically
we already did such a thing for
the encoders. For the
encoders, we said that
sometimes we need to turn on
or turn off the encoders. When
it is turned off, meaning
that the output always is gonna
be 0, it means that the
device is turned off. It acts
like it doesn't accept any
input. When the
encoder becomes enabled, it means
that now it's turned on and it
accept the changes from the
input in order to create
output. The same is here. So we
want to kind of turn on or off
or put a lock on the sequential
logic SR in order to accept
the changes or turn it off, do
not accept the change.
And store whatever you
already have. So this is enable
input, we can do this by
introducing an additional input
enable input. Let's see, let's
see what's up. How can we build
that? So basically this is the
normal RS or SR sequential
logic. Q and your Q prime.
So as you can see here, if I
introduce a AND gate before the
internal RS.
And add an additional
input enable E.
As long as E is 0,
it goes to the one input of the
AND, so when we have zero in one
input of the AND, we don't have
to look at the other inputs,
simply output 0. So as long as
E is 0, the output of these
ANDs is gonna be 0, meaning that
the RS are both is gonna be 0,
the internal RS, the black
one. So as long as E is zero,
the external RS,
whatever the values are, we don't
care. The internal RS is
is gonna be 00, meaning that we
store whatever we already have.
So this means that in practice,
it implies that we don't accept
the changes to the external
RS, we always put the 00 in the
internal RS and we keep
whatever we already have.
However, when the E becomes one
in the AND gates, it means that
now we have to see what's going
on with the RS.
So then it works like a
normal RS sequential logic
If 00, the same. As you can
see here, 00 connects to the R&S
and stores. If it is 01, so
1 goes to the R. 0 goes to the
S. This is the reset.
If S is 1, R is zero.
External the blue one, so S = 1
comes here. 1 and 1,
enable is 1, one and one
becomes one. So one goes to
the internal S, zero goes to
the internal R, so it becomes
the set action.
And if it is one and
one, the internal S and R becomes
one and one, which is forbidden, the
don't care condition.
So basically by just
introducing additional AND
gates before the internal
R&S and ending the R&S with
the Enable, we create a
sequential logic with a
latch. So as long as E is
zero, we don't look at the
external R and S.
The internal RS is gonna be
00, which means that store
whatever you already have.
But if E becomes one, it works.
It accept the changes from the
external RS and based on the
value of R&S, it determines
whether it stores or changes
to zero or one.
So this is called SR or RS latch,
meaning that we have a RS
sequential logic with Enable input.
And let's see what happes
when we add a enable a input to
the sequential logic.
So we have R and S, the
external changes to the R&S as
you can see within the time.
Also, we have additional enable
input and the value is as you
can see here, a very regular
pattern of zeroes and ones.
So 0 1 0 1 etc.
So basically, because of the
enable input, we just unlock the
sequential logic when the enable
input becomes one.
At times that the enable input
is zero, we don't have to look
at the value of R&S. The value
of R and S is gonna have I
mean no changes to the internal
state, and we keep whatever we
already have in the sequential
logic. So let's see
what's happened.
So at first.
At initial time, we assume that
everything is in an initial
state, so the current state of
at time zero is zero and
because the Enable is zero, we
said that we keep whatever the
state of the sequential logic
is. So the door is locked.
The R and S from the
external, we do not look at them,
so we keep just the initial
state zero, up until when the
enable input becomes one.
When the enable input is one,
we look at the external
R and S, so R is zero and S is
1. It is the set action and
we go to the set action.
As long as the Enable is
1, the R is zero and S is one,
we keep this state to be one
because we are in the set
action. And when
the Enable becomes zero, it
means that now we close the door,
we lock the sequential logic
and we don't accept any change
from the R and S.
So we keep whatever we already
have. As you can see
here, within this time
the R and S changes.
The R goes from zero to one
and S goes from one to zero.
But because the Enable is 0,
the door is locked. We don't
look at them, just restore
whatever we already have.
And then at this time.
E becomes one. We mean that we
open the door and now we see
what's the R&S. R is 1, S is 1.
It brings the sequential logic
to indeterminate state.
And then we close
the door, because we were in the
indeterminate state. So when
we close the door, we still
are in the indeterminate state.
E becomes one.
Now we open the door and we see
what's going on with the R&S.
So R is 1, S is 1. Again, it goes
to the indeterminate state.
As you can see here, we close
the door. E is 0, the changes to
the RS doesn't matter. We
keep whatever we already have.
Again now. Enable become one. We
see our R is 0, S is 0. This is
the valid state pr valid action,
meaning that we store. But
because we already were in the
indeterminate state, we stored
indeterminate state. Valid action
but invalid state.
When enable is zero, we
closed the door. When we close
the door, we keep whatever we
already have, so this is the
next state.
And an interesting thing happens
here. So we open the door. The
E is 1. Within this time period,
R still is 1. However, S
changes from zero to one. As
long as S is 0,
and R is 1, the
sequential logic goes to 0
instead, because this is the
reset
action. R is 1 and S is 0,
so we reset the internal state
of the sequential logic.
However, suddenly, the
door is still open. The S changes to
one. So it brings the 0
state to the forbidden
state. So 11 is not a
valid action and brings
the internal state to 0.
So you see that, I mean, you can
continue all I mean to the end
of this I mean time interval.
But in this flow you can see
that we could control when the
changes to the R&S propagate to
the inside of the sequential
logic when the E is 1.
So at times when the E is zero, we
don't have to look at the
R and S, it's kind of a
controlling the propagation of
the external RS inside
the sequential logic.
However, even within this time
interval when the E is 1, the
R&S has the chance to change
from zero to 1.
There's kind of, I mean, multiple
changes when the door is open
and this causes some
inconsistencies inside the
sequential logic. Uh, and
changes the state even
within this short period when
the door is open.
So the question is that is it
possible to reduce this time
interval, to reduce the time that
the sequential logic is unlocked,
or the door is open, in order to
give the very little chance to
the R&S to change? To the change
the internal state of the
sequential logic? So the answer
is yes, and in the ongoing slide
we are going to describe how
can we solve these situations
when the Enable is one and R
and S, actually for instance here, R and S
changes multiple times.
So before that.
Just going to introduce a
concept called Clock. Clock is also I
mean shortened as CLK or Clock.
And the thing is, as you can see
here, the E has a regular pattern
0 1 0 1 and the time period for the
zero and the time period was for
the one is similar, and it keeps
continuing very similarly, 0 1 0 1 0 1.
So a device that generates such
a pattern, I mean, a train of the
zeroes and ones is called a Clock.
In digital units,
Uh, we create this system. I
mean, this device
just to generate this pattern
of zero and one.
This pattern which is
called train of pulses.
Each period of this zero
and one is called a pulse.
So basically, a device that
generates these regular pulses
is called a Clock. It's very
similar to the heart beats in a
human being, so the heartbeat or
the pulses of the heart is a
Clock in terms of
digital units like
a heart. It just creates
some pulses of zero and
one in the digital system.
So what's the purpose of the
lock? The lock is usually in a
digital unit. We don't have only
one sequential logic just to
store 1 bit, zero and one.
We usually have, I mean more
than one bit. For instance, in
the lab assignments, you already
saw that we have, for instance 8
bits, which is called a byte, or
more than that. I mean usually
in a digital unit, we
is gonna store for instance 16 bits,
32 bits and etc.
So if we have more than one
bit, we want to synchronize all
these memory units
all at once except the changes
in order to avoid any
inconsistencies. Imagine you
have 8 SR latches, and we
store a binary number, which
can represent a decimal number,
and then you want to change that
decimal number or binary number
to a new number. In order to do
that, you have to kind of
synchronize all these bits
together to accept the change in
order to come up with the stable
state altogether. So the main
purpose of the Clock is this.
Generate the pulses of zero and
one and give this pulse to the enable
input of the SR latches.
In the practice,
by default, when the
memory units or when the SR
latch is enabled when the Clock
is one, it is called positive level.
So basically when the Clock
becomes one, the Enable becomes
one and all the memory units
accept the changes.
This is the default.
And we call this active high. So
basically what we've said so
far. We put a latch which
becomes open when
the Clock becomes one or the
enable input becomes one. This
SR latch is called active high
SR latch.
Basically,
when the enable becomes
one or becomes high, the
latch is gonna be open.
However, there are some systems
that works negatively.
We call this negative level,
meaning that when the Enable
becomes zero, they open the
door. So we call this type of
latch active low, and in
order to make a difference, we
just put the inversion bubble in
the enable input. So when you
see this block diagram with
enable with the inversion
bubble, it means that it becomes
active or it opens the door and
you see R and S when the Clock is 0.
Active low. So again.
Here the active high.
Here active low.
So let's have more focus on the
other property of the Clock.
Actually, the Clock
can be a metric in order
to measure the speed of a
digital unit or a digital
system. So. Oh this
guy. I mean, Heinrich Hertz, he's
a famous. He was a famous
physicist. Actually he proved
that the electromagnetic field
actually exists. So basically
when there is an electric
magnetic field, we can create
electricity in the back.
So I'm not talking about that
invention in this slide, but
I'm saying that his name becomes
a metric, which
we are is gonna explain it in thr
next slide.
So.
This is our normal
train of pulses.
So.
We could generate the pulses in
slower manner, I mean within the
same time as you can see here,
the difference within the first
train of pulses and the second
one. The first one, it seems that it
generates the pulses of zero and
one in one period. It takes
longer time. As a result, it has
longer time for positive
level and negative level.
However, the second one
within the same time
interval produce two pulses.
If you compare this
one with the third train of
pulses, the third one, within
the same amount of time, you
can create three pulses.
So the question is that
how many pulses can I
create in one second?
If you assume that this amount
of time is 1 second for the
first Clock, we can create only
one pulse in one second.
So one pulse in one second is
called 1 Hertz.
And this name comes from the
Heinrich Hertz physicist.
So basically, the amount of
pulses in one second is the
number of Hertz or the speed of
the Clock. In the second one, we
could create two pulses within
one second. So we called the
speed of the Clock as 2 Hertz.
We speed up the production of zero
and one. The third one
creates about more than
3 pulses within a second, so it's
about 3 Hertz, so this is kind
of a measure to
calculate the speed of the Clock
based on the number of pulses it
generates in one second.
So. What's the relationship
between this and our course?
The relationship is
as long as I create more pulses
within one second,
I'm able to change the state of
my memory units faster.
If I'm going to, for instance, I
do a calculation based on the
memory states, I can do the
calculations much more faster
because I'm allowing the memory
units to accept changes very
often. So for instance, if I
have a system that accepts this
Clock, 3 pulses in one second,
I'm trying to change the state
of the memory unit 3 times
faster than this one.
So basically, if I could
design a digital system
that works with a faster
Clock, it means that the
digital system is faster.
And this is called a Hertz. You
can see the problem in the
reverse order. We could say that
how long does it take to produce
one pulse. For the first one, it
takes 1 second, for the second
one, in one second, we produce
two pulses. So how
long does it take to only
create one pulse? One divided by the
Hertz or the speed of the Clock.
1 / 2 so it takes half a second
to get one pulse.
For the third one, it created.
It takes only third of a second
to produce one pulse.
So one over the Hertz or the
speed of the Clock is the
how long it takes
to only produce one pulse.
So if you go to the market and
buy a CPU for a computer system,
an important metric for that is
the speed of the CPU, which is
expressed as this. For instance,
for this Intel CPU you can see
it says 2.9 GHz. GigaHertz means,
1 billion GHz means 1 billion.
Basically said it says that this
CPU. Can generate.
22.9 * 1 billion
Hertz or 1 billion
pulse per second.
So you can imagine how fast
the Clock speed in this in
CPU is and how fast the
calculation can be done by
this CPU. I choose this is
the state of the our CPU. I
believe in today's market.
And if you go to this link in
Wikipedia, you can see the
progress of manufacturing
digital units to do the
calculation based on the number
of pulse the Clock can generate
and the calculation can be done.
So as you can see here today in
2016. Uh, this is 28 billion
pulses within a second. This is
experimental. It's not
commercial, but it means that we
could create this amount of
pulses in a second in a.
Laboratory is not in
a commercial trend.
Also, for other devices of a
computer system, for instance,
if you go and buy a memory
module, the speed of the memory
module is expressed as a number
of pulses within a second, so.
2666 meaning that 2.6.
Giga Hertz or Mega I mean
1000 Mega becomes 1 gig so
the speed of this memory
module is 2.6 giga Hertz.
Clock cycle per second.
And if you build a
computer system.
Uh, you have to buy a main
board, installed a CPU and
memory module in order to
process your for instance
program and etc. So your program
goes to the memory module and
your program going to be run by
the CPU. So if the CPU speed
is X Hertz, meaning that the
Clock can be can generate X
number of pulses within a
second and if memory has the Y
speed. y Hertz? Meaning
that it can generate y
pulses within a second?
The main board has all its
own speed, meaning that it
can support up until Z
pulses per second.
So what would be the final speed
of this whole system?
Anybody in the class can
answer this?
for instance we bought an Intel
with the 2.9 GHz and then we
bought a memory module with the
speed of 2.6 giga Hertz.
And we go to the market and in
order to buy a main board to
install the memory module and
CPU and the memory module says
that the speed is for instance
2.3 GHz. So we have three
different speed. But we when we
start our program to run the
program or do the calculation,
what would be the final speed?
Correct, actually paul and
Nicholas actually said it
correctly. Yes, because The
thing is as long as the
information are inside each
device, they can act based on
the internal Clock of that
device. So if the information
are inside the CPU.
Calculation can be done by the
CPU so X Hertz if the
information are inside the
memory module inside the memory
module we can do processing by
y Hertz but if the processing
depends on the communication
with two devices so CPU wants to
talk with memory and memory
wants to talk with CPU it
downgrades the speed to the main
board. Because the main board is
the communication platform.
So this is the bottom like
as the Nicholas says, so all
these speeds actually
downward to Z.
At market usually technology for
the CPU is much more higher, so
the speed of the CPU's is much
more higher. However, I usually
the speed of the main board an
memory module are the same.
Usually the main board
manufacturers actually wants to
keep up the speed with the memory.
And as long as they supported
memory speed, they are good.
But the CPU are much more faster
than the memory and main board.
So if you have a CPU with 2.9
GHz and if you buy a
memory module 2.6, you're kind
of wasting the. Your CPU it's not
a total waste because as long as
the information or inside the
CPU they can work at this Clock.
However, if your information or
outside the CPU, it drops to the
this Z. So this idea actually
helps you when you do the
programming, you try to keep
your information or your data
inside the CPU instead of inside
the memory. This way in the next
course computer architecture
two. Also there's another course
assembly language. You learn how
to keep your data inside the CPU
in order to take advantage of
the CPU speed.
So there's another topic called
Overclock I remember at the
first class of this course. One
of these student asked me about
what is over clocking.
So now we know what is Clock. So
Clock is a device that generate
pulses and the speed of the
Clock depends on the number of
pulses within a second.
So the overclock means that we
allow the CPU or we allow the
memory the lower speed device
memory and also the main board.
To be free out of it, it's
standard speed to catch up with
the CPU. So whenever we allow
dynamic speed, meaning that the
device can changes the Clock
from a minimum to maximum, it is
called over clocking. You can do
the research on this at home,
but this is the general idea. So
if we buy in memory module with
over clocking or if we buy a
main board with over clocking,
it means that the main board or the
memory module can.
Adjust the speed in order to
catch up with the highest
maximum speed, which is usually
catch up to the CPU speed.
So this is just a short history
about the Clock and the speed
and what we when we go to market
and buy digital units. We have
to think about the speed which
is expressed as the number of
pulses within a second.
And the metric is Hertz.
So let's back to our basic
digital unit, the only
memory unit which can store
just one bit zero and one.
The S R latch.
There are different ways to
build SR latch the way we
design it. It was just using two
NOR gates and plus two
additional and gate for the R&S
with enable input.
Uh, in the book there is a
better design and the reason is
that because all the gates is gonna
be NAND so there's a new design
with the NAND gate and the
beauty of this design is that it
uses. only NAND gates in our
design we used NOR gate here an
and gate here, but with the SR
latch with the NAND gate, all
the gates are now that's the
beauty of the design.
But the thing is, this is
exactly the same as the our
design. So if enable IS0SR
doesn't matter, we just keep
whatever we already have. If
enable is 100 store action,
no change, 01 or is 1 S 0
reset action.
We bring the state to the reset
state as is 1, or is zero goes to
the set state.
And one one indeterminate. So the
truth table for both design are
the same. Actually whatever gates
you used to design the SR latch,
you have to follow this standard
truth table for the SR latch.
One thing you have to pay
attention with this design is
that in this design S comes
first and R comes next. So S
is attached to a path to Q&R is
attached to a path to Q prime.
In our design it was reversed,
so R was attached to the Q& S
was attached to the Q' so be
careful about this. I mean
change, so within and it S
comes first R comes next for the
Nor gate R comes first and S
comes next. This is the only
thing you have to pay attention.
What, however, as long as they
show a block diagram of SR
latch, you don't care about
what's going on inside. We
just see that if R&S is 00,
store 10, reset, 01 set, and
one one is forbidden.
So this is the if you go to the
Wikipedia you can see different
design of the SR latch too.
With different Gates.
I.
Is there any questions so far?
Oh well, let's go
back to the slide.
As long as we do the reset
and set yes, but sometimes
R and S both are zero.
So they are not not of each
other, they're not complementing
each other. It means that you
don't want to. Neither reset
Nor set the state. It means that
just store so the only case that
the R&S are the same is here 00
in that storing in reset the
complement each other one zero
and in the set here S becomes
one R become zero and when both
becomes one this is forbidden.
We never put both to one. So to
answer your question there are
compliments of each other in the
reset and set action.
But they are the same.
When we is gonna store these
things, this is the only case
they become both 0.
Any other questions?
So.
Let's work more on the SR latch,
so remember I mean.
Be careful about, uh, let me
come back. So you have let
me come back here.
Yes. Is truth table.
Work you have to kind of
mastered this truth table for
the SR latch. I kind of
memorizing so this is the single
unit. This is a kind of I mean.
Invention so we could create a
sequential logic. Or we could
create a digital unit or logical
circuit that can
Store 1 bit. This is an
important. I mean
creation so the SR latch can
store. Reset set so this is not
an easy task, so this is kind of
a I mean genius invention.
So try to memorize this truth
table and try to memorize
different. Try to work with
different design of the SR
Latch. Our design or the
books design and remember
the truth table.
So this is a huge invention
for the digital units. We
could store 1 bit and we if we
stack multiple SR Latch we
can store multiple bits. So we
are trying to build an
assistant that can store
information by combination of
logic with additional
feedbacks.
So let's play with this unit SR
latch. I mean more work more with
this unit. So The thing
is, as Marco said, if you
try to avoid the forbidden
State for the R&S, there's
a forbidden state for R&S,
when both becomes one.
How can we avoid that?
One way is that.
You always make them
compliment of each other.
So we create a new input X
and we put X to the R and
not of X to the S. This way
always the R&S are
complements of each other.
So let's see what's happened.
What happens if we do that?
So as long as enable is zero, we
said that the SR latch is
locked. We don't look at the
input. So it just preserved the,
uh. Previous state, whatever it
is already stored inside the
sequential logic restore it.
So doesn't matter the value of
X, either zero or one E is 0.
However, when the
E becomes enabled.
Now the value of X matters
because the door is open and we
accept the change from R&S.
If X is 0 ,X goes to the R.
As you can see here,
X goes to the R.
R becomes zero, an S
becomes one, so this is the.
This is the set action.
So if X is zero, which changes
the state to one set action, so
X is 0, R beocmes 0, S 1, which makes
it to this set state.
However, if you change X to 1.
R becomes one and S becomes
zero. This is the reset action.
So what the reset action would
bring the state of the.
R&S latch to 0.
So reset this state.
So based on the value of X, we
can set and reset and never.
R&S becomes equal to
each other.
So we kind of avoid the
forbidden value of the R&S,
which was both becomes one.
This design has it. I mean, kind
of acting or behaving kind of
complement of the X. So if X is
0, this state becomes one. If X
is 1, state become zero.
So if we do the reverse, I mean
if we attach X the S
And then a not of X to R the
reverse behavior is gonna happen.
So if X becomes 0.
x goes to the S becomes zero
Zero and not goes to the R, R
becomes one. So if X is zero it
brings the state to 0.
If X is 1, it brings the state
to the set action and makes it
set so set state.
So. Based on these two different
designs, I mean attaching.
X to R This design attaching X
to R and not of x to S this
is 1 design.
Another design is this attaching
X to S and the not of X to R.
I prefer the second one, and the
reason is because in the second
one, if X is zero, it makes the
inside zero. If X is 1, the
states becomes one, so it's kind
of I mean in align with each
other. So the second design
is gonna be selected and it's
called D latch.
So I renamed the X to D.
And whenever D is 0, D
attached to the S and the not of
D attached to the OR so
whenever D becomes 0.
It makes the inside the
sequential logic, the SR latch
0. If D becomes one.
It becoms it makes the
inside of the SR one.
As long as E is 1.
So if he is 0 to S or internal
SR latches closed so it keeps
this state if it becomes one.
D0 makes it 0 D1 makes it 1, so
this D latch is the
same exactly as this.
So X. We change
to D and then.
attach to S the not
attached to R.
So D latch is SR latch when
the R&S as a complement of
each other and the input is
attached to the S input.
So usually we do not show the
enable column anymore in the
truth table because we know that
when E is zero it means that the
latch is closed.
E is 1 the lattice open, so it
depends on the value of input.
So we usually do not show any
column for the E enable input. So
this is the D latch D0 makes it 0,D1
makes one. So in the D latch you
can see that we avoid the
forbidden Action 11 for the
SR but also we lost the store
state which means that when the
R&S become zero.
So this is a tradeoff. We lost
the store action, but also we
avoid the forbidden action.
In the D latch.
And again, this is the D latch
RS with enable input
R S this is the RS latch and
if you attach D to the to the S
and the not of D to the R it
becomes D latch.
And in order to show the deal as
we show it by the D as you can
see here, this is the Q. This is
the Q prime as the SR latch. But
here it shows D, means that
this is a D latch.
So in order to do their recap,
so for the SR latch. So when we
see the E means that this is the
latch. So for the
SR 00 store 01 reset 10
set. 11 forbidden.
For the D latch.
0 makes it reset.
Set when D is one. It
makes it set state.
So shorter I mean a truth
table, but in order to
avoid the forbidden.
Value for the R&S. But it lost
this action store action too, so
for the D latch, in order to
store, we can make the Enable
input 0. That's the way to
simulate the store action for
the D latch.
So let's, uh.
Create a let's redesign the SR
latch in order to.
Avoid the forbidden action. 1
1 for the RS.
In another way. So.
This is the D latch.
Sometimes in practice of.
Not sometimes. Actually most of
the times, as you can see, so
far the most prevalent gate in
all our design in the
combinational logic or
sequential logic is the
Not gate. So notting a value
is the most prevalent action or
the most common action.
So the question is that is it
possible to build a SR latch?
That whenever we want to apply
the nots, we ask the latch to do
the not or to do the compliment.
So if the value is zero, we want
to make it 1. If the value is
one, we want to make it 0.
Normally we have to do that with
the set and reset action, so we
have to check the inside of the
said if it is zero we put the
set action in the input, if it
is one, we put their reset
action in the input to make a
compliment or not. Of each bit
we are stored in the SR latch.
What the question is that, is
it possible to build a latch
that does that based on the
input? Whenever we ask the
latch to do a compliment that
does the complement fully
inside.
The question is yes, the answer
is yes, and here's the design.
First of all, although we know
that in the first output of
the latch we have the Q and
the second output, we have the
Q prime, so we always have the
compliment, but this
compliment is the complement
of the current state.
This complement is the Q
prime of the Current state
Q'(T). However, we want to
store the Q prime of the T
you want to not only generate
the Q', meaning that the not
have the current state, but
also we want to store it.
So we want this. You want
to make the Q ,Q at
time T to store Q' of T
at the next time interval.
This is possible.
With this design, so if
you look at the lecture
assignment last week.
There is a nice property of
exclusive or and which is this.
A binary variable, exclusive or
with one, generates the not of
the binary variable.
However, if you exclusive or
with zero, it creates the.
Binary variable without any
change. So in order to store
the complement of a bit in SR
latch or in a D latch, we can
employ the exclusive or.
And here's the design.
So basically we attach the Q.
From the output to the input of
the D latch with an exclusive or
gate. As you can see here, if
you are currently at time T and
state of the D latch is Q.
The next time interval when they
enable becomes one. Q comes
here. and Q exclusive or
with one. Becomes Q' and
the Q' goes to the D.
OK, if the Q is zero, Q'
becomes one and in the D latch, D
becomes one, makes it one so
compliment if the Q is 0.
Here becomes Q', which makes
it sorry if Q is 1.
Q' becomes zero and the D
becomes zero in the D latch. If
the D becomes zero, it's reset
the internal and next 0.
So basically by an exclusive or
in inside in front of the D
latch. With one we can create a
compliment state for a D latch
or SR latch.
However, as long as the T or one
input up exclusive or is zero,
we could say that no change to
the internal state. It's kind of
storing, so by this design we
can ask the D latch either to do
the compliment or to a store
without any change.
So here is the truth table for
this design with a D latch. So
if T is 0.
The input of the D is Q, the
current state exclusive or
with zero. Anything exclusive
or with 0 doesn't have any
impact, so Q.
So as long as T is 0.
D is gonna be the same state as
in the previous state.
Gonna be Q.
However, if T becomes one.
Q exclusive or with one becomes
Q Prime. So at the next time
interval Q' is gonna be at
the D latch  which is the
complement of the current state.
So in this new design we have
a store state or a store action,
an compliment action.
And here is the design just to
do the recap. So we start
with the RS sequential logic. We
build an RS latch we build then
the latch and by reusing the D
latch we could build a new latch
which is called T latch in order
to store or compliment the bits
inside the latch.
And this is the block diagram
for the T latch.
So we have enabled its a latch and
also we have here this alphabet.
T means that this is a T latch.
Q and q'.
So for the T latch, as long as
T is 0,  we store as long
as T is one we compliment.
So again, in the T latch.
We tried to do we keep this
store is the action so we can
store. What we cannot set or
reset the only action possible
is the complement.
So please work on these latches
and try to master these truth
table so it's kind of. I mean,
memorizing the binary number,
for instance for 123. So you all
up to now you all all this you
must know, for instance, was the
binary #4 four, which is 0100.
The same is here. After this
course, all of you should know
the truth table for different
latches, RS latch. These are the
action and these are the
consequences of the action.
for D latch these are the action
only second reset for the T
latch store compliments.
So you can see that the RS latch
has store set reset but doesn't
have the complement action.
So we're going to introduce
another final latch which is
called Jack Kelvin. The idea is
that in all these three latches.
We could set, reset and
compliment, but we don't have
one single. Latch that can do
all these actions together.
The RS latch can do their
store reset set but cannot
compliment. So the ideal latch
would be reused the 11.
Action instead of just forbidden
reuse this values for doing the
compliment in the T latch, so
then I would have a complete
latch doing store reset set and
complement action. All four
essential action on the latch.
And this I that is designed by
Jack Kilby. He's a famous. I
mean, he was a famous electrical
engineer actually. This is
surprising because an electrical
engineer won Nobel Prize in
physics. in 2000 actually go to the
Wikipedia page and read about
this person. He did a lot of
contribution. This is the.
First IC or the first latch
which is able to store 1 bit
which is called JK Latch and in
order to see the scale. This is
the scale. I mean if you scale
it to the hand of a person.
So he could build a handheld.
Calculator by using this latch
or JK latch.
That's why he is considered
as the inventor of the
handheld calculators.
So if you want to see the I mean
physical, the first physical
appearance of latch, this is the.
one?
So let's see what is JK latch?
Let's see, you have
enough time, yeah?
So for the SR latch.
We have a store reset and set
action. The only possible the
only forbidden state is both are
one. So the question is that can
I use that forbidden action?
To do the compliment and make it
a permissible action.
So in order to do the compliment
in the D latch, we saw that we
can do feedback out of the latch.
So from the T latch, we build
the D latch by the feedback on
the D latch. So is it
possible to do the same for
the SR latch with feedbacks?
We I and do something
on the R&S based on
the feedbacks.
to allow normal action on
the SR latch, meaning that
store reset an set action
plus a compliment action.
The competent action was just. I
mean if you have Q and then next
time interval make it Q prime.
If it is zero, we wanted to make
it 1. If it is one, we want to
make it 0. We did that for the
T latch, but didn't get feedback.
So. The answer is yes, and the
answer actually is very simple.
If you attach an AND gate.
On the SR latch and AND the
SR with. The.
output of the SR latch. If you
AND the S with the Q prime
output an if you and the R
with the Q.
Uh, output?
You not only preserve the store
reset and set action, but also
you avoid the 11, the forbidden
state, and you can do the one
one for the compliment action.
And here is the truth table. So
let's see what's going on.
So the red R&S are the external
R&S, as you can see here and the
blue one or the internal R&S for
the SR latch.
So again, as long as E is 0,
meaning that the SR latch is
locked store, so we don't look
at the input.
So we don't include it in this
truth table. It's trivial.
However, if E is 1, if E is 1,
so we accept the input from R&S.
But what is the input for the
blue R&S? if, the external
R&S  is 00.
In the AND gate,  we have 0 so R&S
becomes 00. So.
Store. The same action store.
However, if R becomes one and S
still remains at 0, so S is 0,
so the internal S is still 0.
However, if R becomes one, so
in and gate we have to wait for
the other input and the other
input comes from Q.
At the current state.
So they are becomes Q
at current state.
If S becomes one and R is 0 this time
R the internal R is gonna be 0
and the internal S, waits as you
can see here, if S becomes one,
it waits for Q prime.
So the QT followed by the not.
And if both are one.
Both input is gonna be waited for
the Q&Q prime, so S waits for
the Q' at current time, an
R is gonna be Q at current time.
So let's see based on the
current value of QT. What's
happened with these truth table?
If the current value is 1.
External if 01 internal
becomes 01. The same
reset action.
If the external is the set
action. The internal becomes 00,
which is the store action.
What's the current value is 1,
so we try to set.
the one, but internally we store
it. So the same I mean,
output set makes it one because
it's stored in one.
If it is both one for the
External R&S. It makes it 01
for the internal when the
internal state is 1.
When the internal state is 1 and
the external R&S 11, the
internal R&S depends 00 01
which is the reset. The reset
makes the 0 = 1, so it's a complement
of the Qt.
So 00.
Keep this state Store
1. The current state
is 1, so you store it.
External reset makes the
internal reset.
External set makes
this store internal.
So we store one so set
is 1 and external 11 makes
it 0 compliments.
The same is with when
the time is. When they
current state is 0.
So if the current state is 0,
the QT is 0 here, so the reset.
Store 0, which is the 0 value
for the next time interval the set.
Action makes it set makes the 0 1
and the 11 makes it set mean
that makes 0 to one.
So.
You can see that the SR latch
becomes the JK.
J attach to S, K attached to
R. The JK is the name after
the Jack Kilby.
So if J K 00 acts
like as the R&S 00 store.
If J is zero and R,K is
1. The reset if S is
1 or J is 1 and K is zero the
set. And if both or one.
It complements the
current state.
So this is the complete
latch store reset set and
compliment.
So I guess we are running
out of time.
We can continue. I mean next. I
mean the Wednesday for the next
slide, but please work on these
four essential latches.
At RS latch, D latch, T latch
and JK latch. the JK is
the most complete latch we have.
So thank you so much everyone
and will continue working on the
latches on Wednesday. So but for
now we have four different
latches and we are not going to
introduce more latches. So
because we have the complete
latch JK latch and if
There is any question,
I'm happy to take that.
Any questions?
Yeah, go ahead.